<h1>Unsupervised Learning & NLP: Album Recommender Based on Pitchfork Reviews</h1>	


In week 6 at Metis, we were tasked with conducting an Unsupervised Learning & NLP exploration of our choosing to present at the end of Week 8.


**The Premise:**

Goal: Create an album recommender for my <3 Family <3

My motivation behind this project was to create an album recommender for my family and friends.

We all love music, and have very different tastes in music. 

For example, my husband, Jeff, is a part time rapper - J-Trigg. 

My parents are really into classic rock, like Jefferson Airplane, James Taylor, and Lou Reed. 

My sister & BFF, Abbey, who lives in Portland, is very into the country and rock scene. 

And I, on the other hand love electronic, house, and pop music. 



**Methodology:**

I used the beautifulsoup package to parse through the html code of all Pitchfork album reviews from the last year. Approximately 1200 reviews.

In case you don't know, Pitchfork is an American online magazine launched in 1995, based in Chicago, Illinois, and owned by Condé Nast.

I stored the data in MongoDB and analyzed and manipulated the data with pandas and python, then ran through several unstructured data learning models, but ended up choosing Non-Negative Matrix Factorization a/k/a NMF.


**Topic Modeling with NMF:**

NMF is a matrix factorization technique that is good for topic modeling. 

For example, in a document-term matrix, each column represents a document, and each element in the document represents the weight of a certain word. 

With NMF, I was able to reduce the words down into 8 topics, so that each review could be represented as some combination of the 8 topics.

**Topic Results:**

I was able to discern Primary and Secondary topics for each review within the data. Here are my top 3 most frequest topic and subtopic combinations:

1st main topic: songwriting & folk; subtopic: jazz and compositions.

- The model came up with Big Thief’s U.F.O.F.: Pitchfork says, “The 3rd album from the Brooklyn quartet is an intimate and surreal experience, a true masterpiece of folk music from a band working together at the highest level.”

2nd main topic: rap/hip-hop; subtopic: songwriting & folk: 

- The model came up with Polo G’s Die a Legend: Pitchfork say “Polo G blends pop and drill with ease and delivers a standout Chicago street rap debut that is meticulously crafted and honestly told.” 

3rd main topic: songwriting/folk; subtopic: women/girls, & stars: 

- The model came up with Selena Gomez’s – Rare: Pitchfork says “Selena Gomez’s third album is a smooth and confident pop record that delves deep—but not that deep—into heartbreak, resilience, and self-love.”



**Model vs. Favorite Album Results:**


I also ran my family’s favorite albums through the model and looked at the top cosine similarities for each of their favorites vs. the model.

The Cosine similarity is measured by the cosine of the angle between two vectors and determines whether two vectors are pointing in roughly the same direction.  Each album review is an object represented by what is called a term-frequency vector. The scale is from 0 – 1. With 1 being perfect similarity. 

I was also curious to see how these recommendations compared with assigned genre.


Jeff’s choices were both rap albums:

Jeff’s 1st pick was Chance’s Acid Rap. The Model picked: Lil Peep’s GOTH ANGEL SINNER EP, a rap album, with a Cosine similarity of .991. 

Jeff’s 2nd pick was Freddie Gibbs’ Piñata. The Model picked Skepta’s Ignorance Is Bliss, also a rap album, with a cosine similarity of .972.


My Mom’s pick was Bob Dylan’s Blood on the Tracks a Rock album. The Model  picked Peter Ivers, Becoming Peter Ivers, in the Folk/Country genre, with a Cosine similarity of 0.989.

My Dad’s pick was Revolver by The Beatles. The Model picked Jeff Rosenstock/Laura Stevenson’s Still Young EP, with a cosine similarity: 0.951. Both albums are in the rock genre.


Abbey’s 1st pick was Guns N' Roses, Appetite for Destruction. The Model picked Sonic Youth’s EVOL, they are both in the rock genre, with a Cosine Similarity of 0.937.

Abbey’s 2nd pick was Taylor Swift’s 1989 in the Pop/R&B genre. The Model picked  Emily Reo’s Only You Can See It, which has no genre assigned to it, with a cosine similarity of 0.971. 


My first pick: Crystal Castles II by Crystal Castles, a band that broke up in 2014. The Model picked Inflorescent by Friendly Fires. They had a Cosine similarity of 0.945. Like Crystal Castles, Inflorescent is also an electronic album.   

My other pick: Born to Die by Lana Del Rey. The Model picked: The Seduction of Kansas by Priests. Cosine Similarity: 0.966. Born to Die was Pop/R&B. Seduction of Kansas was Rock. 


**Conclusion & Future Work:**

In conclusion, genre came into play somewhat in terms of the topics, but ultimately, was not necessarily a deciding factor in determining a fave album vs. Model’s cosine similarity. The recommender was able to distinguish unique categories and subcategories to classify albums.

Overall, this was a fun way to involve my family to look for new music recommendations. Going forward, I’d like to try my friends’ and future colleague’s favorite albums against the model too.

**Repository**

Feel free to check out my project 4 repository on github:

https://github.com/jcnachman/Projects




```
---
layout: post
title: Unsupervised Learning & NLP
---
```

